Make Your Own Brainard
Director: Rona Cran
https://makeyourownbrainard.cal.bham.ac.uk/#

Make Your Own Brainard is an interdisciplinary digital humanities project using remnants of collage pieces from artist Joe Brainard’s storage collection. 
The project allows the website visitor to learn about the works of Joe Brainard and the history of the New York School of art, 
along with being able to construct their own collage using the unfinished pieces from his collection. 
These pieces have been scanned digitally for use in an online collage or for the visitor to be able to print them into a traditional paper format and use them as 
Joe Brainard would have. The visitor is also able to search through a digital gallery archive to view the works of visiting virtual artists that have used the site’s 
collage maker before them.    

The project looks somewhat basic technologically, but the construction of the site is very straightforward. The home page explains the purpose of the website, 
how to make a collage using the digital photo-editing tool, and how to download the pieces of collage fragments. There is also a section on the visitor gallery 
where users of the website can leave their pieces for others to see, which has an option to destroy their collage with a parallel to many of Joe’s works being lost.
At the bottom is an area for visitors to contact the site creators if there are issues with the collage composing area. 
The heading tabs make for easy site navigation to the informational pages on the histories of the project and Joe Brainard himself, 
along with a tab that leads to the collage making web page.    

The collage making web page itself is also very easy to use, presented as one square of digital art-making space. 
The instructions for the collage composer immediately open upon clicking to the web page. 
These instructions are very simple and have a prominent close button, and a button in the toolbar that brings the instructions back to display onto the screen. 
The toolbar has many options for the visitor to choose the images from Joe’s or their own collection 
they’d like to use or move them however they wish or change the background for their collage. In my opinion, the usability of the 
features for the collage maker are so straightforward a child could use it, making it accessible for a wide audience.
My only point of advice would be to have the instructions visible at all times rather than having to exit out of them and reopen them whenever they’re needed, 
which obscures the vision of the collage.    

From an artistic perspective, there is much to appreciate about the way the website continuously encourages its users to experiment with collage and see fragments 
of ephemera as potential for a new work of art. There are quotes of advice from Joe that gives his perspective on how he created collages by not forcing the work 
to come to life, and simply moving them instinctively. There is also an entire web page about the way artists from the New York School created collages and how the 
visitor should move forward in creating their own. This is how the project moves beyond being a regular photo editor and moves into being a real tool for learning 
about and creating real art in honor of Joe Brainard: by encouraging the future of multimedia artists to pursue their passion through the site.    

The project allows for strong usability of its features and doesn’t overcomplicate the collage making that is central to its purpose.
It also perfectly gives enough history and reflection on the memory of Joe Brainard that makes the visitor feel that the aspects of collage and 
his life as an artist are not jarringly intertwined on the website. It is obvious that the project hopes to give a space for digital interdisciplinary 
exchange of ideas and creation between academics, poets, artists, curators, digital humanists, computer fanatics, teachers, and students.    
